Historical Archive — Cloud Camp — September 2008

[I found this in an archive and thought it was worth sharing 10 years on. This is one of the first events I attended as we were starting to figure out our cloud transition at Netflix, and was where I first met Dave Nielsen, Reuven Cohen, Sam Charrington, and Sara Dornsife]

From cloudcamp 9/30/08

Hello CloudCampers,

As you probably know, CloudCampSV is taking place tonite at Sun’s Executive Briefing Center in Menlo Park. And it’s sold out. We have an excellent lineup of attendees and we expect the unconference to be quite informative. See below for the schedule.

We are also happy to partner with SDForum’s Cloud Computing and Beyond conference which takes place tomorrow in Santa Clara.

And of course we’d like to thank our sponsors for their generous support. Without them, we’d have to charge a lot more than zero dollars for this wonderful event. We hope you will view their offerings.

Sponsors:

Sun — http://www.sun.com

ParaScale — http://www.parascale.com

GoGrid — http://www.gogrid.com

Appistry — http://www.appistry.com

SOASTA — http://www.soasta.com (pronounced So Sta)

SnapLogic — http://www.snaplogic.com

Google App Engine — http://code.google.com/appengine

Also, we’d like to invite you to propose topics for sessions tonite (in the format of a group discussion). If you are interested in proposing a session, no need to respond. You will be given the opportunity to propose your session at 6:30pm. So don’t be late! For those of you unfamiliar with the unconference session proposal process, please read about it here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconference

Other than that, we hope you get a lot out of the event. And we thank you for helping to make CloudCamp a success. If you have any questions, feel free to let one of us know.

Best,

Dave Nielsen

Reuven Cohen

Jesse Silver

Sam Charrington

Sara Dornsife

Tonites agenda for your convenience:

Agenda:

CloudCampSV Agenda:

Preparation:

4:30 Open up for setup

- All are welcome to help setup ;-)

Networking:

5:30 pm (60 mins)

- Drinks & Food

Opening Remarks:

6:30 pm (10 mins)

- Thank the sponsors

Overview of Camp Agenda:

6:40 pm (20 mins)

- Intro to Open Space format

- Session Creation Process

Session Breakouts:

7:00 pm (50 mins with 10 min break)

8:00 pm (50 mins with 10 min break)

9:00 pm (short session — 30 mins)

Closing Remarks:

9:40 pm (10 mins)

Let’s Party

9:50 pm (40 mins)

Date: Tuesday, September 30, 2008 from 06:00 PM — 10:00 PM (PT)

Location: [this is now Facebook HQ]

Sun EBC Briefing Center

15 Network Circle

Menlo Park, CA 94025

For more information click here: CloudCamp Silicon Valley 08

This email was sent by Eventbrite, your total online solution to publish, register, manage and promote events. Host Your Events With Eventbrite

Click here to unsubscribe from events by “CloudCamp.”