Open Source at AWS re:Invent

We’re excited to let you know that we have an Open Source track at re:Invent this year! Learn about what’s in it:  https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/open-source-at-aws-reinvent-2019/  Some selected sessions:  OPN201 Change is coming to robotics development: The shift to ROS 2 🤖 Alejandra Olvera-Novack — AWS Developer Relations on how the shift from Robot Operating System (ROS) 1 to ROS 2 will change the landscape for all robot lovers.  OPN220 Build robotic cloud simulations with ROS and AWS RoboMaker Join Camilo Buscaron, AWS Principal Open Source Technologist, and Katherine Scott, Developer Advocate, Open Robotics in this workshop to use Gazebo, a 3D simulator, and Robot Operating System (ROS) on AWS RoboMaker and learn how to spin up robotic simulations.  OPN204 Secure your Open Distro for Elasticsearch cluster Dive deep on Open Distro Security: secure your cluster with your own SSL certs, set up fine-grained access control for your documents and fields, assign users to roles, create multi-tenant Kibana visualizations and dashboards, and integrate with federated identity providers like LDAP, Active Directory, and Okta.   OPN303 BPF performance analysis (repeats) Learn how Netflix uses eBPF to create powerful performance analysis tools. Brendan Gregg tours BPF tracing, with open source tools & examples for EC2 instance analysis.   OPN205-R Contributing to the AWS Construct Library (repeats) Using and loving the AWS Cloud Development Kit and want to help make it better? Join Lee Packham, AWS Solutions Architect and Enrico Huijbers, AWS Software Development Engineer to find out how easy it is.  OPN304 Learnings from migrating a service from JDK 8 to JDK 11 AWS Lambda improved latency by migrating to JDK 11 with Amazon Corretto. Learn about how Lambda works behind the scenes, and how you can follow these steps to migrate your application to Corretto with Niall Connaughton — Software Engineer, AWS Serverless Applications, and Yishai Galatzer, Senior Manager Software Development.  OPN207 PartiQL: One query language for all of your data PartiQL is a SQL-compatible query language that makes it easy and efficient to process both structured (relational) data, as well as semi-structured, schemaless, and nested data, as typically found in open data formats in the Amazon S3 data lake and document-oriented databases. PartiQL is a unifying query language, enabling single-query-language access to multiple AWS services. Almann Goo, Principal Engineer, and Yannis Papakonstantinou, Senior Principal Scientist discuss PartiQL’s core tenets and how they served AWS services and Amazon projects, and how PartiQL can benefit your applications and tools in need of unifying query access to the data lake.  OPN308-R1 PartiQL: Solution integration and joining the community (repeats) In this chalk talk, Almann Goo, Principal Engineer, and Yannis Papakonstantinou, Senior Principal Scientist, address how you can use the PartiQL open source in the development of your application, BI tool, and/or database service, and how to join the PartiQL community and contribute to the next steps in its evolution.  OPN402 Firecracker open-source innovation Since Firecracker’s release at re:Invent 2018, several open-source teams have built on it, while AWS has continued investing in Firecracker’s speed. Radu Weiss, Software Development Manager AWS, and Sebastian Bernheim,Customer Success Engineer Weaveworks, discuss Weave Ignite from Weaveworks, which unifies containers and VMs using Firecracker microVMs with OCI images, containerd, and CNI. Leigh Capili (DevAdv) demos how to launch apps from Git using Kubernetes orchestration, Ignite virtualization, and GitOps management. Alexandra Iordache (Firecracker maintainer) showcases Firecracker’s new snapshotting capability.  OPN211 How Zalando runs Kubernetes clusters at scale on AWS Henning Jacobs, Senior Principal Zalando SE, shows Zalando’s approach for running 140+ clusters on AWS, how it does continuous delivery for its cluster infrastructure, and how it created open-source tooling to manage cost efficiency and improve developer experience, openly sharing failures and learnings from three years of Kubernetes in production.  OPN305 How Optum manages transient developer accounts at scale Optum uses Disposable Cloud Environment (an open-source account management product to facilitate public cloud experimentation in isolated sandbox environments) to empower its tens of thousands of engineers to explore public cloud services and resources while mitigating business risk. Learn more from Kevin DeJong, AWS Senior DevOps Cloud Architect, Matt Meyers, Lead Cloud Engineer Optum, and Marissa Crosby,Product Manager Optum.

I’ll be there all week, presenting my own talks on Monday:

ARC203 Innovation at Speed — based on my short eBook, Cloud for CEOs

ARC335 Failure is Not an Option — a joint presentation including customer experiences, multi-region networking technology, and a section by me based on the previous blog post on failure modes.